===========
Ray Tracing
===========

.. javadoc-import::
    com.flowpowered.math.vector.Vector3d
    org.spongepowered.api.block.BlockType
    org.spongepowered.api.entity.Entity
    org.spongepowered.api.entity.living.player.Player
    org.spongepowered.api.world.Location
    org.spongepowered.api.world.extent.Extent
    org.spongepowered.api.util.blockray.BlockRay
    org.spongepowered.api.util.blockray.BlockRayHit
    org.spongepowered.api.util.blockray.BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder

Generically, ray tracing is a method of determining the path of a particle through a coordinate system. In SpongeAPI,
this is implemented with the :javadoc:`BlockRay` class to discover blocks in the path of an arbitrary line in space. A
common use case could be to find the block that a :javadoc:`Player` is looking at.

You can specify the origin of the ray using the ``BlockRay#from`` method, passing in either a :javadoc:`Location`, an
:javadoc:`Extent` and a ``Vector3d``, or an :javadoc:`Entity`. The method will return a
:javadoc:`BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder`.

.. tip::
    If you specify the origin of the ray to be an ``Entity``, the default direction will be the direction in which the
    ``Entity`` is pointing.

To specify the end point, you can use the :javadoc:`BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder#to(Vector3d)` method, which will set both
the direction and ending location. Alternatively, you can specify a direction using
:javadoc:`BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder#direction(Vector3d)` and also a distance limit using
:javadoc:`BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder#distanceLimit(double)`.

.. note::
    The default distance limit is 1000 blocks as a safeguard to prevent infinite iteration. To disable the distance
    limit, use a negative value with ``BlockRayBuilder#distanceLimit(double)``.

Filtering
=========

Filters determine what blocks are accepted by the ``BlockRay``. To add a filter, use the ``BlockRayBuilder#stopFilter``
or ``BlockRayBuilder#skipFilter`` method, passing in one or many ``Predicate<BlockRayHit<E>>``\ s (where ``E`` extends ``Extent``). The ``BlockRayBuilder#stopFilter`` stops the ray cast when it hits a block that passes the given filter 
and the ``BlockRayBuilder#skipFilter`` skips all blocks that pass the filter. These filters can be chained together
to create a complex ``BlockRay``. 
For convenience,``BlockRay`` contains the following methods for common filter use cases:

 * ``allFilter``: returns a filter accepting all blocks
 * ``onlyAirFilter``: returns a filter accepting only air
 * ``blockTypeFilter(BlockType)``: returns a filter accepting only the specified :javadoc:`BlockType`
 * ``continueAfterFilter(Predicate<BlockRayHit<E>>, int)``: returns a filter that continues past the given filter by
   the specified number of blocks.

Of course, you can also write your own ``Predicate<BlockRayHit<E>>`` filter.

Finally, use :javadoc:`BlockRay.BlockRayBuilder#build()` to finish building the ``BlockRay``. An example usage of
``BlockRayBuilder`` to get the first non-air block a ``Player`` is looking at is provided below.

.. code-block:: java

    import org.spongepowered.api.entity.living.player.Player;
    import org.spongepowered.api.util.blockray.BlockRay;
    import org.spongepowered.api.world.World;

    Player player;
    BlockRay<World> blockRay = BlockRay.from(player)
        .stopFilter(BlockRay.continueAfterFilter(BlockRay.onlyAirFilter(), 1)).build();

We can rewrite the above to use ``BlockRay#skipFilter(Predicate<BlockRayHit>)`` in addition to 
``BlockRay#stopFilter(Predicate<BlockRayHit>)``. This will skip all air blocks and stop at the first non-air block it
hits.

.. code-block:: java

    BlockRay<World> blockRay = BlockRay.from(player)
        .skipFilter(BlockRay.onlyAirFilter()).stopFilter(BlockRay.allFilter()).build();

Using BlockRay
==============

Since ``BlockRay`` implements ``Iterator``, you can use such methods as ``hasNext`` and ``next`` (but not ``remove``)
to iterate through the :javadoc:`BlockRayHit`\ s generated by the ``BlockRay``. Additionally, you can use the
:javadoc:`BlockRay#reset()` method to reset the iterator to the starting location. Rather than iterating through the
``BlockRayHit``\ s, you can also use the :javadoc:`BlockRay#end()` method to trace the block ray to the end of its path
to get the last block accepted by the filter (or none if the block limit was reached).

Using BlockRayHit
=================

``BlockRayHit`` contains information about each block intersected by the ray. It contains the location of the block, the
direction of the ray, the coordinates of the *intersection* of the ray and the block, and other similar data. The
following code uses the ``BlockRay`` from the previous example to print out the location of the first non-air block
in front of the player.

.. code-block:: java

    import org.spongepowered.api.util.blockray.BlockRayHit;
    import java.util.Optional;

    BlockRay<World> blockRay = ...;
    Optional<BlockRayHit<World>> hitOpt = blockRay.end();
    if (hitOpt.isPresent()) {
        BlockRayHit<World> hit = hitOpt.get();
        System.out.println("Found " + hit.getLocation().getBlockType() + " block at "
            + hit.getLocation() + " with intersection at " + hit.getPosition());
    }
