============
The Data API
============

Overview
========

The unified Data API aims to provide a consistent way of accessing and modifying data of any kind. Where other
approaches define the available data using interface and inheritance (like a ``LivingEntity`` interface providing
getter and setter functions for current and maximum health), in Sponge every entity, block etc. is completely
oblivious to what data it holds. While this may appear less straightforward than direct accessor methods, it is
foremost far more extensible. And thanks to the addition of ``Key``\ s, simply accessing specific values is no
less straightforward.

.. warning::

    As of writing, the Data API is not yet fully implemented. Refer to the `Implementation Tracker
    <https://github.com/SpongePowered/SpongeCommon/issues/8>`_, ask in the ``#spongedev`` IRC channel or on the
    `Forums <https://forums.spongepowered.org>`_ to find out if the data you need to work with is available yet.

Concepts
========

On first glance at the API docs, the data API threatens to overwhelm you with lots of interfaces and packages. But
to simply use the data API, you will not have to deal with many of them, as most interfaces found there are just
specific data manipulators.

DataHolder
~~~~~~~~~~

A data holder is just that - something that holds data. It provides methods to retrieve and offer back data. The
interface itself is completely oblivious to the type of data held. Since only the implementations will possess
this knowledge, it is possible to ask a ``DataHolder`` to provide data it does not have or to accept data it
cannot use. In those cases, the return values of the methods will provide the information that data is not
available (via ``Optional.absent()``) or not accepted.

Property
~~~~~~~~

A property is a read-only point of data. It provides information that is directly derived from its holders type,
but, unlike other data, unchangeable (except for core mods). Example for this are the harvesting ablities on tools
(represented as ``HarvestingProperty``) or the damage absorption of an equippable armor item.

DataManipulator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A data manipulator represents points of cohesive data that describes a certain component of its holder. For
example ``HealthData``, which contains both current and maximum health. If a data holder has ``HealthData``, it
has health that can somehow be depleted and replenished and can die if that health is depleted. This allows for
the re-use of such components over the API and prevents duplication of accessor methods - as sheep, stained glass
blocks and leather armor all can share the ``DyeableData`` holding the color they are dyed in.

Key
~~~

A ``Key`` is a unique identifier for a single point of data and can be used to directly read or set that point of
data without worrying about data manipulators. It was designed to provide a convenient way of accessing data
similar to direct getter/setter methods. All keys used within Sponge are listed as constants in the
``org.spongepowered.api.data.key.Keys`` utility class.

Value
~~~~~

Within the Data API, a value referred to by a ``Key`` is encoded in a container object. For this documentation, it
is referred to as 'value container' to avoid confusion with the actual value, but note that the class name
``ValueContainer`` has another meaning in the API. A value container encapsulates the actual data value (if it is
present), a default value (to be used if no direct value is present) and the Key by which the value is identified.

Contents
========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2
    :titlesonly:

    keys
    datamanipulators
    transactions
